#1321 Transaction script model implementation (#1480)
iluwatar/java-design-patterns: transaction-script/Readme.md

---
layout: pattern
title: Transaction script
folder: transaction-script
permalink: /patterns/transaction-script/

> categories: Domain logic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
categories: Behavioral
```

tags:
 - Data access
---

## Intent

> Transaction script(TS) is mainly used in small applications where nothing complex is done and bigger architecture's are not needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transaction Script organizes business logic by procedures where each procedure handles a single request from the presentation.
```

## Explanation
Real world example
> Your need is to be able to book a hotel room and also be able to cancel that booking.
> 

In plain words
> All logic related to booking a hotel room like checking room availability,
> calculate rates and update the database is done inside a single transaction script.
> Similar procedure is also needed for cancelling a room booking and all 
> that logic will be in another transaction script.

Programmatic example

> The Hotel class takes care of booking and cancelling a room in a hotel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Hotel` class takes care of booking and cancelling room reservations.
```

  }

  public void bookRoom(int roomNumber) throws Exception {

    Optional<Room> room = hotelDao.getById(roomNumber);

    if (room.isEmpty()) {
      throw new Exception("Room number: " + roomNumber + " does not exist");
    } else {
      if (room.get().isBooked()) {
        throw new Exception("Room already booked!");
      } else {
        Room updateRoomBooking = room.get();
        updateRoomBooking.setBooked(true);
        hotelDao.update(updateRoomBooking);
      }
    }
  }

  public void cancelRoomBooking(int roomNumber) throws Exception {

    Optional<Room> room = hotelDao.getById(roomNumber);

    if (room.isEmpty()) {
      throw new Exception("Room number: " + roomNumber + " does not exist");
    } else {
      if (room.get().isBooked()) {
        Room updateRoomBooking = room.get();
        updateRoomBooking.setBooked(false);
        int refundAmount = updateRoomBooking.getPrice();
        hotelDao.update(updateRoomBooking);

        LOGGER.info("Booking cancelled for room number: " + roomNumber);
        LOGGER.info(refundAmount + " is refunded");
      } else {
        throw new Exception("No booking for the room exists");
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> This class has two methods, one for booking and cancelling a room respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Hotel` class has two methods, one for booking and cancelling a room respectively. Each one of them handles a single transaction in the system, making `Hotel` implement the Transaction Script pattern.
```

```
public void bookRoom(int roomNumber);
```
The book room method consolidates all the needed steps like checking if the room is already booked
or not, if not booked then books the rooma nd updates the database by using the DAO. 

```
public void cancelRoomBooking(int roomNumber)
```
The cancel room method consolidates steps like checking if the room is booked or not, 
if booked then calculates the refund amount and updates the database using the DAO.

## Class diagram
![alt text](./etc/transaction-script.png "Transaction script model")

## Applicability

> Use the transaction script model when the application has only a small amount of logic and that
> logic won't be extended in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the Transaction Script pattern when the application has only a small amount of logic and that logic won't be extended in the future.
```

## Known uses

> * Revenue recognition in business systems.

Reviewer: I think in this section we need to list very specific uses. So if we can't point to an implementation let's leave this section out.
